Link: https://meet.google.com/jxf-kvsv-ibz [one-time-link; check here for link
updates if it doesn’t work]

next : https://meet.google.com/ymg-cauc-ezc

Latest Definitions: https://github.com/ontolex/morph/blob/master/draft.md

Nexus: https://nexuslinguarum.eu/the-action/join-us

Participants [please add yourself]:

Christian Chiarcos (CC)

Max Ionov (MI)

Katerina Gkirtzou (KG)

Besim Kabashi (BK)

Fahad Khan (FK)

Khadija Ait ElFqih (KAE)

Matteo Pellegrini (MP)

Ciprian-Octavian Truică (CT)

Penny Labropoulou (PL)

Elena Simona Apostol (ESA)

Sina Ahmadi (SA)

Elena Benzoni (EB)

Petra Steiner (PS)

Theodorus Fransen (TF)

Thierry Declerck (DFKI)

Ranka Stanković

Gilles Sérasset (GS)

Mike Rosner (MR)

0. Module draft (4.17)

[image1]

No changes

Organisational

What are open topics?

  • 
        Character / sound classes

  • 
        morph:baseConstraint

  • 
        Finite state terminology

  • 
        Issues with semitic?

  • 
        MP: Naming “paradigm” => morphological patterns? Inflection type?
        Inflection Class?

  • 
        TODO@CC: Tbc: issues on wiki page

  • 
        TODO@CC: Tbc: issues on specific data sets (github)

Suggestion:

  • 
        Can we do a requirement freeze in two weeks?

      □ 
            Sending email announcement, asking people to raise objections or to
            propose new data

      □ 
            Not: freezing vocabulary, just freezing requirements (and to
            propose new data)

  • 
        Vote:

      □ 
            Yes: 11

      □ 
            No: 0

      □ 
            Abstain: 1

  • 
        TODO@CC: send email about that freeze (DONE 2023-03-13)

Publications

MWE Chapter

  • 
        Submitted: https://www.overleaf.com/8285444258rpfnbwgwbrdp

  • 
        Slack channel: #frac-mwe-chapter

LDK

  • 
        Mike and Max on Maltese

  • 
        Possibly Ranka on football dictionary

      □ 
            Contributors?

LDK workshop

  • 
        Fahad worked on the website

  • 
        Call for participation, program needed

  • 
        In contact with sara caravalho (on terminology)

  • 
        To figure out how to do registration

  • 
        Sep 12, full-day

  • 
        Catering in doubt

  • 
        There will be parallel events

      □ 
            Not online, yet

      □ 
            proling knower (half-day) and the Frame Net (half day) and
            Disinformation and Toxic Content analysis (full day) will be in
            parallel on the 12th

      □ 
            proling morning, framenet afternoon

=> so any synsem stuff in our workshop into the morning and any metadata into
the afternoon

  • 
        We need a separate call

      □ 
            Prep to be coordinated by CC and FK on slack

Character / sound classes

Max and Mike, LDK paper on morph on maltese/semitic

Problem: /(K)([aeiou]{1,2})(K)([e]{1,2})(K)/\1\3i\5t/

  • 
        Can be done without, but illegible

Gilles:

  • 
        Does it resemble two-level morphology?

  • 
        Max: basically named groups, can just be expanded, but illegible. Also
        problem with functionality might be digraphs that represent a single
        unicode character

Proposal: to add a class representing a character class (e.g. vowels,
consonants, “sun consonants” — Maltese)

consonants morph:SoundClass ;

rdf:label "Sun" ;

?:contains "d", "n", “r”, “s”, “t”, “x” .

consonants morph:SoundClass ;

rdf:label "Sun" ;

?:contains "[dnrstx]" .

  • 
        Data is the Maltese data discussed here before, will be partially
        converted

  • 
        CC: separate module? Together with signs?

  • 
        MI: not about phonology, more about representation; workaround:
        precompile within rule set

  • 
        GS: proposal contains two things:

      □ 
            Mechanism and terminology

  • 
        TF: what is the usecase of mimicking finite state paradigms

  • 
        CC: interoperability with dictrionaries and “text book rules”

  • 
        MI: rules motivated from minimizing the inventory (rules instead of
        full forms). That was a requirement from the beginning

  • 
        Mike: question of what we want morph, necessary for languages where
        orthography mapping is not 1:1

  • 
        GS: strip out heuristics, focus on description how language changes
        strings

  • 
        MI: not implementing FST, just using the means (a very small part) to
        encode rules for generating wordforms

  • 
        GS: morphology describes transformations, so we need that

  • 
        CC: let the proposal sink in for a few weeks, if there are additional
        use cases that really require this within morph, we could implement it,
        the need and motivation is clear. Not fully convinced that modelling
        should be restricted to morph

  • 
        Mike: will be discussed in paper

EVERYTHING ELSE POSTPONED

morph:baseConstraint

  • 
        morph:baseConstraint — found only in one example with Inuktitut
        generation.

    In a nutshell, morph:baseConstraint can be used to provide prerequisites
    for a morph to be compatible. For example

    :m1 morph:baseConstraint [ :pos "v" ] .

    sets the requirement for the word that this morph can be added to. And
    morph:grammaticalMeaning holds grammatical categories for the morph itself,
    as before. But shouldn’t it be only for a Rule, not for a Morph?

It is 2023, we need to finish the module

  • 
        MI: I think we achieved a level where we freeze everything and write it
        up

  • 
        Is there anything we are missing?

      □ 
            KG: LREC paper discusses the limitations of the module, we need to
            look at this, discuss the asap. TODO@KG: look into it and add this
            to the agenda or report it

      □ 
            MI: I think that we can still have limitations unsolved for the
            final module, we just need to explicitly decide

  • 
        Should we vote in Slack+mailing list since not everyone is in the call
        (prediction)

      □ 
            CC and MI should decide, then send to OntoLex chairs to approve

      □ 
            TODO@MI,CC: discuss

  • 
        Thoughts?

      □ 
            FK: maybe we still need more discussions, especially w.r.t. Semitic
            languages

      □ 
            FK: maybe we can take a couple of Wiktionary examples, model them
            (naively) and then show to experts (Mike, Khadija, Ilan)

      □ 
            FK: it is very important that we deal with non-European languages
            (non-Indo-European), so we need to make sure that we can model at
            least a good sample of languages of the world

      □ 
            MR are we going to try to handle Maltese data of this kind? If so I
            would be glad to help.

Handling of Semitic languages [maybe today]

TO-BE-DONE: figure out how to include missing categories to LexInfo

Khadija: data prepared for Arabic (cf. last time):

  • 
        Morph Module semitic.odt

Necessary features:

  • 
        lexinfo:POS extensions (solved? See last call minutes for procedure)

  • 
        Modelling diacritics in Arabic (cf. call minutes last time)

      □ 
            Also cf. Umlaut in German and vowel harmony in Turkish for similar
            challenges

          ☆ 
                Recommendation (< GS): NFD normalization in morph:Replacement

          ☆ 
                TBC: are we ok with modelling roots as Morphs (i.e.,
                LexicalEntries)?

      □ 
            If not modelled as morphs, then they could be modelled as rules
            (replacements)

          ☆ 
                DONE@CC: model updated

              ○ 
                    morph:grammaticalMeaning and morph:baseConstraint as
                    properties of morph:Rule, the grammatical meaning is the
                    change in meaning or morphology of the word (root)

          ☆ 
                TO-BE-DONE@FK: model a Hindi/Urdu example, e.g., https://
                en.wiktionary.org/wiki/
                %E0%A4%96%E0%A5%81%E0%A4%B2%E0%A4%A8%E0%A4%BE#Hindi

          ☆ 
                TO-BE-DONE@Khadija: Modelling examples for Arabic entries

  • 
        Not discussed yet: Circumfix

      □ 
            Morph:CircumfixParadigm

      □ 
            Prefix+suffix combination

AoB ?

